There are two concepts that you are going to learn in this video activation patching and the indirect
object identification task, which is often abbreviated to I, o.
And actually activation.
Patching is just another term for editing the internal activations.
So there's really only one concept to learn in this video.
The I o test is often used to study language models, and it basically just assesses the model's ability
to understand grammar and in particular, indirect objects.
Let me start by telling you about activation patching.
So imagine you have some language model that is processing a text sequence.
And that's what I'm depicting here.
So we have text sequence A and I'm using this one letter to refer to a whole sequence of tokens, like
a whole sentence.
And here I'm just depicting the embeddings vectors traversing from one transformer block to the next
and being slightly modified at each step.
Okay.
All fine.
Now imagine we have exactly the same model, but processing a slightly different token sequence.
Maybe A and B are the same sentence, but they differ by one word.
So that means that the embeddings vectors from this sequence will be at least a little bit different.
Okay, so now the idea of activation patching is to transplant the activations from this sequence onto
this sequence.
So we take the actual activations from one block, let's say transformer block T plus one.
And we literally just copy those activation vectors and paste them onto the output of transformer block
T plus one over here.
In practice, this is generally done only for one key token that carries a lot of information.
So now going forwards we have what is sometimes called the corrupted information for this model by patching
in the activations from a different model or well it's the same model but processing a different token
sequence.
So on the one hand this is literally just editing the activations, just like lots of other examples
and techniques that you are learning about in this section.
But the reason why they call this patching is because you are taking like a patch of activations from
one token sequence and transplanting it into another.
You could also think of this as like the donor model and the recipient model.
Here is another diagram that illustrates this concept.
So there's a lot of stuff going on in this whole figure.
That's fine.
I just want to draw your attention up to here to this depiction here.
So the idea is that you take the activations from processing one token from one model, and you implant
it into the same position when the model is processing a slightly different sequence of tokens.
And it turns out that depending on exactly where you perform this patching, you might observe no impact
or a really significant impact on the final output.
Logits of the model.
Okay, so you are going to see exactly how this works in in code in a few minutes.
But first let me switch to explaining the IOI task.
So an indirect object refers to a noun that receives the direct object from the subject.
If you're not so familiar with English grammar, or maybe it's been several years since you studied
all these grammar terms, then that definition might sound really abstract.
Here's an example.
Bob and Barbara went to the beach.
Bob gave the umbrella to her.
So in this sentence, Bob is the subject, the umbrella is the direct object, and Barbara is the indirect
object.
And you know from context that the pronoun her here refers to Barbara.
In fact, if I would even drop the word her altogether and just stop the sentence with two, you would
still be able to predict what the most likely next word was.
It would be either Barbara or her, and the fact that you can identify the indirect object from the
context of these two sentences is exactly the indirect object identification task.
And when we run this test through the model, then the idea is that we grab the final output logits
and literally just subtract the logits for Barbara versus Bob or her versus him.
There's a couple of different ways you can set it up, but that's the basic idea.
So, uh, in an experiment, we craft a sentence such that the indirect object is the final word, like
in this example here.
Then we drop the indirect object, run a forward pass, and then we calculate this delta value here
for the two possibilities of indirect objects.
So for example her minus him or maybe Bob minus Barbara.
So this is the basic version of the task.
And what I will show you in the code demo is how to measure changes in this task performance metric
when we patch different parts of the model.
So the purpose of this video is to introduce you to setting up the experiment and how patching works.
And then we will return to this experiment in the next section of the course when we start manipulating
individual attention heads.
I'm going to work with GPT two XL here.
And I'll put it on the GPU because the text sequence is short, but we do process it once per transformer
block, which means we need to do 48 forward passes.
So here is the token sequence.
Here's the text that we will use.
So in an I o test you always have a pair of sentences that you have the subject and indirect objects
swapped.
And why do we want them swapped.
Well the idea is that we grab the internal activations Deviations from this token here for Mike, and
then patch that onto this sentence in the same token index position in place of Emma.
And the thing is that in this second sentence, the correct token after two would really be Mike.
However, if we take the activations for this word Mike over here and patch that onto the second sentence,
and then maybe the model will start preferring the token for Emma at the end of this sequence.
So that's the idea of this manipulation.
Before getting there, we can calculate the IOI on clean versions of the model, which means no patching,
no manipulations.
Here you can see I'm calculating the logit differences of the final tokens for these two target words.
Now in the first sentence the correct token is the word Emma.
So the token logit for Emma should have a higher logit value than Mike.
And you see that indeed, the IOI value there is -3.3.
And then when we swap the order, the model should prefer Mike over Emma.
And there we see a positive IOI value of 2.1.
So these values are our clean estimates of the model's understanding of grammar and indirect objects.
Now we are ready for the experiment.
Here you see a for loop over all of the layers in the model.
Now so far in this section of the course I have separated defining and implanting the hook function
from the rest of the code to test the manipulation.
But now here I'm setting it up slightly differently.
So here I'm creating the hook function, implanting it, and then removing it all at each iteration
within this for loop.
So these hook functions only go into the model exactly when we need them, and then they are immediately
obliterated after we no longer need them.
And what is happening inside this for loop.
Well here you can see I'm running a forward pass.
This is a forward pass for the M tokens, which means Emma gave the coffee to Mike.
So the correct token to predict here at the end of this sequence is Mike.
And then I'm grabbing the hidden states here.
So the outputs of the transformer blocks.
Now this code is exactly the same for every layer of the model.
And what differs for each layer is the hook function up here.
So here you can see I'm implanting the hook into the entire transformer block, so that when I grab
the hidden states up here.
That is the output of the transformer block.
And that's exactly the same as the hidden states that I am grabbing in the forward pass down here on
this line.
And also what I got earlier from the clean run.
And then here on this line of code, I am replacing the final token and all of the embeddings vectors
with the hidden states from layer I plus one.
And then also the final token and all the embeddings vectors.
Now these hidden states were taken from the me text, which means Mike gave the coffee to Emma.
So Emma is the correct output in this token sequence.
So that is the line that does the patching.
I'm taking the activations from the donor model and transplanting them onto the activations in the recipient
model.
Now here's a question for you.
Why am I looping over layer I up here but I write I plus one over here for this index.
Something for you to think about.
And when I discuss and when I switch to code, I will explain why that plus one is there anyway.
So that's the main part of this for loop.
There's a couple of additional lines down here that I didn't put into the screenshot, but that just
calculates the IOI metric as I showed a moment ago.
So this means that we will have an IOI measure for each of the layers that we patch.
And then we can visualize them like this.
So the x axis is the transformer block.
The y axis is the logit difference which is just the difference in the output logits for the token for
Mike versus the token for Emma, I set up the subtraction such that mike is associated with positive
numbers, and Emma corresponds to negative numbers.
The blue horizontal line and the red horizontal line are reference values from the clean version of
the text.
So no manipulations.
And of course the purple circles show the IOI values after patching each of the transformer blocks.
It's pretty striking that you see this really strong and fairly sudden phase transition somewhere around
halfway through the model from basically, you know, ignoring the patched information and still preferring
the correct token, the contextually correct token to being strongly impacted by the corrupting patch
and preferring the token that is actually incorrect in this text sequence, but was correct from the
donor sequence.
So this is a pretty typical finding for the IOI task, and you get the same effect with the smaller
versions of the model as well.
So smaller versions of GPT two.
I'm not actually demonstrating that here in this code demo, but very easy for you to explore.
Anyway, there's more to discuss, so let's now switch to code some libraries.
Here I am importing GPT two XL.
If you are curious.
I certainly encourage you to try different versions of the model and so on, but you can do that after
the lecture.
I will stick to the XL version for now.
And here I'm defining this variable and layers is yeah, the number of layers.
And just as a reminder we have 48 transformer blocks in this model.
This is convenient because we really want to see this sudden phase shift, this sudden transition in
the model.
So it's nice to have a higher resolution to for the plotting.
Okay.
So here are the text.
The way I have organized these variables is that M means Mike gave the coffee to Emma and M means Emma
gave the coffee to.
Well, it's not actually here, but of course you know what should come here is either the word her
or the word Emma.
That would be the most appropriate given the rest of this context.
Okay.
Here are the token indices for SpaceX, Mike and SpaceX.
Emma.
Of course we need the space in here because we do not expect the model to make this prediction.
We expect the model to make this prediction also.
By the way, I'm not going to demonstrate this here, but if you would like you could also try rerunning
the code.
Oops, that should be her.
And that should be him.
Uh, using these target tokens instead of the proper names.
And so yeah, that's also pretty interesting to run.
I won't tell you what you'll find, but you probably won't be surprised at the results.
Okay.
So then here I tokenize the text, uh, transform it into PyTorch tensors and push it to the GPU.
Here I'm getting the clean versions of the output the hidden states.
And as you know, these will be our baseline comparison values.
Okay, so uh, it is so one of these hidden states is one for one sequence 14 tokens, 1600 is the embeddings
dimensionality of GPT two XL.
And so here is where I'm calculating the main dependent variable the metric I'm calling it logit diff.
So remember me is Mike gave the coffee to Emma.
So here we would expect that the model should have a prediction for the token after the final token
in the sequence of Emma.
Therefore, this token this logit value should be larger and this one should be relatively smaller.
So here we expect a negative value.
And when the sequence the text sequence is Emma gave the coffee to blank, then we expect blank to be
Mike.
And so therefore this value should be larger than this logit.
And so this result should be positive.
And that is what we see here.
Okay.
So now we are ready for running the analysis.
I also have this variable here that I call confirm manipulation.
This is just a variable.
And a quick analysis that I incorporated into this code as a way to confirm the manipulation.
Of course, just a bit of a sanity check to make sure that what we are, what we think we're manipulating,
we are really manipulating.
Okay, I'll explain this in a moment.
So here, looping over layers, here is the patch where I grab the output of the transformer block.
And then I replace that output.
But not all of it.
Only the final token in the sequence, with the corresponding final token in the sequence from the model,
and then.
This is relevant because here, when I run the forward pass through the model, I'm pushing through
the token sequence.
Emma gave the coffee to Mike and here it's Mike gave the coffee to Emma.
So the idea is we are seeing if we can corrupt the model's prediction for the token after the last token
by giving it incorrect information or transplanted information that it was actually Mike who gave the
coffee, and not Emma who gave the coffee.
Okay, so why do we have layer I plus one?
I think I've asked you this multiple times before in the course, but it is a subtle but important point,
which is why I keep repeating it.
The hidden states that you get out of these models when you say output hidden states equals true.
The first index corresponds to the embeddings layer, and index one corresponds to the first transformer
block.
On the other hand, the first transformer block here has index zero.
So if you want these to match, you have to add one over here.
Okay.
Straightforward enough.
So here I implant the hook I get a handle because I want to remove it over here.
And then I do the forward pass and just grab the hidden states over here.
And here I'm calculating the IOI score.
So it's the output logits for M.
That is the token sequence that I pushed through.
And then for the logit for the token MC and the logit for the token Emma.
Now what do we expect here.
Well if the manipulation here, if this manipulation has no impact whatsoever, it doesn't do anything
to the model, then we expect that this model with this token sequence predicts that Mike should be
the proper the appropriate token after the end of the sequence.
So therefore, we expect this difference to be positive and large.
So larger than zero.
On the other hand, if the model gets totally confused and the model starts thinking that it's actually
Mike who gave the coffee to, and then the token to predict after two should be Emma.
If that is the case, then this logit should be large and this one should be small, in which case we
would expect a negative value.
So positive values would mean the manipulation didn't work.
And negative values means that the manipulation did work.
Okay.
And then the final thing for me to explain here is this sanity check here this confirm manipulation.
So what I am doing here is grabbing the hidden states from M and subtracting that from the hidden states
from me.
And it's the same layer.
I just picked this one dimension at random.
It doesn't really matter, we just want any one dimension.
And I'm getting these.
I'm doing this subtraction twice for the final token and for the penultimate token.
And why am I doing this?
And what do we expect these values to be?
Well, uh, remember that what we're doing up here in the hook is replacing the hidden states from the
donor model only for the final token.
So if this really works, if this code really works, this is not about the experiment or like how language
models process grammar.
This is really just about making sure that this code does what I want it to do.
Okay, so if the code really works, if the hook works, then these two should be the same, right?
Because I took these, uh, activations and plugged them into these activations.
So this should be zero.
On the other hand, what I did not do in the hook function is manipulate any other token.
So therefore exactly the same difference should be non-zero because yeah, why would you expect these
to be the same.
They are different tokens.
They come from different models.
They're processing slightly different versions of the text sequence.
And I didn't include this token in the hook.
Okay.
So basically I expect these to be zero and these to be non-zero.
So now we can run this.
I don't know how long this takes on the CPU, but it's one second on the GPU.
So pretty good.
Here's our sanity check.
All of these are zeros.
All of these are non-zero.
And when we get to the end, huh?
We get one non-zero value here.
What is going on there?
If you would like to pause the video and think about why this confirmation check worked for every single
layer except for the very, very last transformer block.
Feel free to pause the video to give it some time to think about it.
This is related to, uh, something a feature of the way that hugging face models work.
And in particular, this output, hidden states equals true.
What is actually being returned when you set this toggle to be true?
I discussed this a bit earlier in the course.
I think it was in the beginning of the section on observational mechanistic interpretability.
When I introduced you to working with hook functions and the relationship between hooks and output hidden
states.
Anyway, the point is, let me go back up to this model architecture up here.
So the point is that the output of the hidden states is exactly the output of H or the transformer blocks
for every transformer block except for the very, very last one.
That last one also includes the layer norm over here.
And so what does that mean?
That means that all of this works exactly as intended for all of the transformer blocks, except for
the very last one and the very last one.
There is this kind of additional layer normalization that gets imposed on this model, because it's
already in this model from the hidden states.
That probably is a little bit suboptimal, but it's not so bad.
It only impacts the very, very last layer in this for loop.
Probably a slightly better idea would be instead of getting these hidden states vectors from the output
hidden states, you could implant another hook and that would just read out the output of the transformer
blocks Uh, without the layer norm at the end.
Anyway, it's a minor point.
Uh, it's important that you know about it, but I'm going to ignore it for now.
Okay.
And then, yeah, I'm just plotting all of these logit differences and showing those, as I showed in
the slides.
So yeah, again, this final point here is slightly awkward to interpret because it gets like double
layered norm.
But it's okay.
Uh, that certainly doesn't break the overall pattern or the interpretation of this result.
Quite striking.
The model went from really preferring MC exactly as it did in the clean version, which means that when
we transplanted from the donor sequence to the recipient sequence, it had basically no impact on the
model's token prediction.
And yet the later into the model we pushed it, the more we have corrupted the model's endogenous processing
so that it starts to prefer what is incorrect in what the token sequence should be, but yet we've corrupted
it by giving it a patched activation from the other token sequence.
I hope you agree that this was a pretty cool lecture, and a really neat demo of when grammatical structure
gets extracted in the model.
On the one hand, copying over all of the embeddings vectors at the output of a transformer is a rather
coarse manipulation, in that it's like bringing a sledgehammer to the experiment.
The neat thing about this task is that it's quite versatile and amenable to lots of other, more targeted
and more precise manipulations.
For example, in the next section on manipulating the attention heads and the attention mechanism,
you will see this task again, and we're going to do much more subtle and precise manipulations.